later I think attributed directly to Hitler to try
to cut the Allied forces in two and capture the port
of Antwerp. So we were right along the way to Liège
and Antwerp. So that's what presumably the grand
strategy was. By that time, of course, the Germans
really didn't have enough resources to pull off
that sort of maneuver. They had far more success
than their capability deserved because the
weather cooperated with them so well and we
couldn't use our Air Force dominance.
Did you capture quite a few German troops? No, just
a few, these parachute troops as far as our
artillery battalion was concerned. Did you ever
talk to any German troops? Did you have an
opportunity to talk with any? No, I didn't. The
ones that were captured were taken to the division
collecting station and turned over to the G2
intelligence people, and I never got involved
with that. Our battalion S2 intelligence officer
did. Yes, because of course any of our troops, any
chairman, soldiers, or intelligence
information picked up came under the S2
intelligence officer, and I was an S3 fire
direction. Sure. Didn't get involved in that. Did
your battalion take early heavy casualties
during the Battle of the Bulge or was it? Not one.
Not one? Didn't lose anybody. Because they
sidestepped you sort of. That's right and of
course we were medium artillery and we were back
from the front lines a little bit. They didn't have
any air capability either. Not by that time, no.
The 19, in fact our battalion I think was only 19
killed or something like that, and that was fairly
early after Omaha Beach when one of our ammunition
trucks got hit by a bomb from a German bomber one
night. Casualties around there, then we had 100%
casualties in our aviation observation planes.
One of them had an accident in a takeoff where he
crashed and burned and another plane was shot down
by a MiG fighter. By what kind of thing? MiG, the
German fighter plane. Messerschmitt?
Messerschmitt. It was called MiG. Is that what you
call it? That's what it's called, yeah. And of
course we first saw the The jet aircraft from the
Germans along about this time too. What did you
think of that? Well we thought that was fantastic.
Our anti-aircraft fire was just absolutely
ineffective against the jet aircraft. They were
so much faster. But they were pretty effective
against the old slow dive bomber types.
Now what happened to the second division after
Battle of the Bulge. Okay, then the advance was
rather rapid right on up to the Rhine River. Yeah.
And we were stationed near Remagen. Oh really?
Yeah, the uh the uh of course American
one of the American uh mechanized divisions got to
Remoggin and got across the bridge before they
could destroy the bridge across the Rhine. And
that was a tremendous advantage. And we were
stationed along the Rhine River at that time and
moved up to it fairly rapidly. At that time- And did
you cross the bridge too? No, that was March of 45.
and that's where I exited. I was messing around
where I didn't have any business. Got in a little
shoe mine and got a hole blown through my right
foot, so I got evacuated on March 15th of 45. Yeah, I
was gonna ask you about while you were a patient for
it looks like five months. Yeah, and then got
released actually because I got evacuated to
Paris and then to England and then back to the
United States. Sent out to Modesto, California
presumably for recovery and commitment to
Pacific Theater. But actually- Basically what
happened then is you stepped on a mine? Stepped on a
little old shoe mine, apparently. When I was just
out messing around, it was a beautiful day, March
the 15th, and it's strange where we were. on Orion
River, the primary observation post was behind
our headquarters. Very unusual. On a high hill,
and it was right from the headquarters, so I just
got out to stroll out to the observation post when I
was off duty as fire direction officer. So I walked
up the hill and was messing around the observation
post, Just taking a look, basically. Just taking a
look. Doing something I didn't have any business
doing. Actually, by that time we had pretty well
known that the Germans were defeated and we were
looking for souvenirs to bring home. I saw a German
rifle sticking in the ground over in one place. I
went over and pulled this out of the ground, but the
Germans had apparently booby trapped around
that. At the time I pulled it out, it was very
strange. I thought it had gone off, and I shot a hole
in my foot. And I didn't really know until later,
until the doctors determined that the wound in the
foot came from the bottom instead of the top, that
it was similar. The little old shoe mines were
similar. They used rifle bullets. I shot a hole
through my right foot, which took me out of action
for a while. Yeah, you were lucky that it didn't put
a bigger hole in you. That's right, actually the
war was virtually over from then and our 2nd
Division wound up in Czechoslovakia before the So
then you were under Patton again? Yes, the
division I think was put under Patton again. I
can't remember who the direct commander was at
that time. By that time, Bradley was directly
under Eisenhower and had an army group. But the
Remagen Bridge area was a very, very spectacular
thing, of course. That gave a tremendous
advantage. The Germans put everything they could
in there to try to destroy that bridge. which they
did, it collapsed after three or four days, but by
that time there had been about three other, two or
three other ponton bridges put across the brine,
so that the crossing was established and was a big
factor in the war at that time. How'd you get along
with the French people?
Oh, we didn't see very much of French people.
in the Ardennes in southern France.
You see the Germans were withdrawing as we were
fighting. They were giving up ground grudgingly
early on, and we just didn't see very many
civilians of any kind. The Germans, as they pulled
back, they'd shoot the cattle and they were kind of
devastating the country as they retreated in the
hedgerow country. Hedgerows were tremendous
factors in the early battle. The biggest surprise
the Germans got was some brilliant warrant
officer in the second division devised a way for
the tanks to cross the hedgerows. and all of the
tanks in the division were taken back during the
six weeks we were sitting there and had angle iron
probes put up welded on the front of them so that a
tank would run these probes into a hedgerow and
then when the tracks raised a little bit it just
lift the top off those hedgerows so they could go
right over the hedgerow one after another. That
was a big factor in the breakout. Now when we got out
of Brest, we did have some contact with French
people.
The strangest things happened in war. When we were
down there, we ran out of salt. We didn't have any
salt in the dining hall. So after Brest fell, we
were looking around for what we might buy from the
French. We hadn't had any fresh eggs. So we went out
looking for eggs, and didn't have any salt. We also
bought a calf from a Frenchman butchered calf. To
have a little meat, fresh meat. And so our S4 went
out looking for salt around. The Germans had taken
up all the salt. so that the French couldn't
withhold food supplies and preserve the salt. We
finally found two pounds of salt in a convent down
in that area. So the French down in that area were
friendly, alright. We did a little business with
them, but we just didn't have much contact. Did you
ever get any liberty or any time off? Well that's a
real strange story. We did have a certain
allocation for the battalion to send troops back
to Paris.
One of the strangest stories, experiences I had,
of course we got the overseas edition of Time
Magazine, Newsweek, that sort of thing. I saw in
Time Magazine, in early 1945, When we were in
Lausfeld, Germany, we were there about six weeks
or so, as I told you, scattered out a long way where
the Battle of the Bulls occurred.
So that was late 1944, and I saw where Westinghouse
had resumed production of irons.
So I told one of my talented young fire direction
soldiers, I said, write him a letter and ask him to
send us one of these irons. Tell him there's no need
to clean up your clothes a little bit. We're
getting a little leave to go to Paris now and all. So
he did, just kind of on a joke. The damn
Westinghouse didn't send us an iron. They did. We
used it for that purpose, to clean up clothes. and
iron clothes to get soldiers ready to go into
Paris, France. It was an unusual thing. Did you get
into Paris? Did you get any R&R? No, not me. I got
into Paris after I was wounded. I was in the
hospital there. Did any of your troops? Oh yes,
some of our troops did get leave to go to Paris, as I
say. We did use the iron and help them clean up
clothes. Not very many, but the division would
have a quota to send on R&R to Paris.
So there was some of that. Artillery troops are not
relieved for R&R. They are not considered to be
under as much stress, and actually they're not. So
artillery is never in reserve. So you don't have an
occasion to be able to relieve a large number of the
troops and artillery to send for rest and
recreation. How'd you get along with the German
people? Well, in this,
we were stationed in this little town of
Lautsfeld, Germany early on, and that's really
the only experience I had much with the German
people, and of course we,
in the case of them getting along with us, we were
the dominant factor there. sure did throw our
weight around a little bit there. Was there a lot of
antagonism? Oh yes, we sure didn't trust them.
They stayed in their houses and they catered to us
pretty good. I had a little meats experience. One
time we requisitioned a hog from one of the people,
butchered hog, used a quarter ton trailer for a
scalding vat, our mess heaters to heat the water
with butchered hog.
I imagine the United States government paid a lot
of money for that hog after the war was over, I
don't know. The Germans
There's no question that during that period of
time, we didn't have enough troops to keep the
Germans from going back and forth across the front
lines. And I'm certain that some of the people in
the little village of Lodsfeld, where we were,
informed the German troops of our presence,
because we did get some counter-battery fire. Of
course, the most spectacular thing happening
long about then was the buzz bombs.
We were kinda stationed right on the path from the
launching site toward England. And one of these-
So you could watch these and hear them go? We could
see and hear them and one of them failed and fell
about 500 yards from our battalion headquarters
at one time. So we were able to look at it at close
range. It did not explode. But
during that time, the buzz bomb, the unmanned
bomb.
What did you think when you saw all these things
going over? Well, we thought that was a kind of a
last gasp weapon. I don't believe I knew. We all
thought that, well, I'm so sure add to the
devastation of London and the heavy population
centers in England, but we didn't think they were
much of a factor as far as the tactical troops.
There wasn't any big enough target, you know, for
the buzz bombs along the front lines. They just
weren't that accurate. They weren't that
accurate, and
They were designed to be targeted on major cities,
because I'm sure they couldn't hit anything
within five miles of where they were aimed.
But we thought they were kind of ingenious. They
had military devices, all right. They certainly
were at that time. Now let's talk about your
hospitalization.
I was evacuated to
Paris first, just there overnight, and then back
to England. How severe was the wound? Well, it was
just behind my toes, a little hole through the
foot. It, of course, tore up the bones and
ligaments in that area. In England, I
can remember very well crawling between clean
sheets. I hadn't seen any of those for 287 days, or
whatever it was, 289 days. What a thrill it was to
get in bed with clean sheets. The army doctors did
an outstanding job of cleaning this wound and
dressing it. They took loose skin from my thigh and
covered the wound. As I started recovering then, I
was put on a hospital ship to go back to the United
States. I think we were 11 days in transit there.
First on a hospital train to go to the port.
And man, I was sure that I'd be sent from New York to
Temple, Texas or somewhere down in my area. sure
was looking forward to seeing my wife.
And getting back closer to home, so you can
imagine. But I was disappointed when I got put on
the hospital train that sent all the way across the
United States to California. You didn't get any
leave at all? Oh well, not then. I was still
hospitalized. After uh, to getting to Hammond
General Hospital in California.
The ward I was put in had several of my former
acquaintances. Like James E. Monk Vance, who's
now in Ag Communications right over here. Frank
Litters, who worked for Texas A&M. We were in the
same ward.
The nurse on that ward is now James E. Vance's wife,
so he married our nurse.
There were some other Texas Aggies in that ward. It
was... That you felt comfortable there? Oh yeah,
we played bridge and it was pretty easy living
there. Of course we all thought that that we
probably would get committed to the Pacific
Campaign. What did you think about that? I mean
after being in Warnhoff or in France and in
Germany, were you eager or were you resistant? No,
I wasn't eager, but accepted it as a soldier's
duty. We recovered, we'd be recommitted to
combat. I got into New York Harbor on VE Day. So the
war in Europe was over before I got sent to
California, Modesto, California, to Hammond
General Hospital.
Now when I was given leave, my wife came out to visit
me there, and when I was given leave, I was starting
back to Texas, and when I was in Los Angeles,
California, I was in Los Angeles on VJ Day, saw the
town really celebrate. I was on my way back for
leave then from Hammond General Hospital.
Then came right back and I was reassigned to the
hospital at Fort Sam Houston and put on outpatient
leave. until December of 45. Yeah, but I came back
in August and resumed my employment with the
Dining Hall Department of Texas A&M in late August
or September of 1945. Okay, let's talk about the
end of your military active duty then. Why'd you
decide to get out of the military? Oh we didn't
really, it wasn't any serious consideration.
Very few officers were retained in the military
forces, and it was never a thought at all to stay in
the army. Not on my part. Then why did you decide to
stay in the reserves? Well, I wasn't
disillusioned with the military at all. I'd had a
successful career, and I was stimulated by
military
duty. Still am. What was your rank when you were
discharged? Well, I got a terminal promotion to
major. I was a captain. When I was first called into
the Army, there was a sergeant by the name of O'Shea
in the school for bakers and cooks, and he and I
worked together on menu planning
He was in the headquarters school for Bakers and
Cooks, so when I went to San Antonio to be
discharged, I went back over there to visit my old
friends. He was a major and I was a captain. He
hadn't been anywhere. He was still sitting at St.
So he had completed his reserve officer training
and got qualified for a commission and outranked
me. But he was a good soldier. I didn't regret that.
When I first went on active duty, Eisenhower was
stationed at Fort St. Houston. Third Army
headquarters was there. General Kruger, they had
what was called the Smith-Young Tower. leased in
San Antonio that's still the tallest building in
San Antonio. Eisenhower was a lieutenant colonel
when I first went on duty. I've often said that
there must be something wrong with our promotion
system. He got promoted seven times to my three.
He was a colonel. Did you have an opportunity to
meet Eisenhower? No, I really didn't. I got to his
headquarters over in London from Northern
Ireland. I had an opportunity to go on leave to
London, where the G1 in Eisenhower's
headquarters, the personnel officer, was one of
my old ROTC instructors named Lloyd Garrison. So I
lived with him for a few days in his apartment up in
the middle of London, not very far from Buckingham
Palace. So I did get a look at Eisenhower's
headquarters in London, all right, but I never met
the man. Now I met his son. John, just a few years
ago, I was at the Army War College with his son John,
who later made Brigadier General too. He was a
reserve officer, so we were at the same course at
the Army War College. I would imagine that the
troops had very high regard for Eisenhower. No
question. Why is that? Well, I really don't know,
except that he was generally perceived as doing a
fine job in the most demanding military role ever
in history.
Stars and Stripes, all the press he got was quite
favorable, so
I'd say that there's 100% respect and admiration
of Eisenhower. What about General Marshall?
Well, he was pretty remote. We didn't have really
any feeling for General Marshall. One of our
previous division commanders was named John C.H.
Lee. He was commander of the
troops. He was a very religious sort of a guy and
unusual. He commanded the second division at Fort
Sam Houston for a while and later was promoted
lieutenant general and was logistic officer and
communications zone headquarters.
and because of his initials and his devotion to
religion, all the troops called him Jesus Christ
himself. JCH Lee called him Jesus Christ himself.
He wasn't a very outstanding combat commander.
Later on we had an artillery commander by the name
of Hayes, and he By golly, I believe he won the Medal
of Honor in World War I. No kidding. And he was a
tremendous combat leader. We had him as Artillery
Division Artillery Commander for just about a
month after we got into combat. He was pulled out
and given the 10th Mountain Division, brought
back to the United States and made it Division
Commander. we saw where that division was
committed in Italy and we said, well it won't be
long until they'll stir things up in Italy because
he was a fighter. That was true. He was, then he was
deputy commander to Lucius Clay after, in Berlin.
He was a tremendous soldier. He transformed
Division artillery, the second division from
kind of parade ground troops into fighting. Could
you compare the quality of the army in World War II
with the quality of the German army?
The German army varied tremendously in quality
because they had the SS troops, the panzer troops,
and then they had the satellite troops and
everything. But their elite troops were
fanatical, disciplined soldiers that would,
without question, do whatever the commander
said. No American troops were ever that way. The
strength of the American soldier was his
independent thinking, his ingenuity, Not blind
loyalty, blind obedience, blind discipline.
Mechanical ability, but you know that's the way
I'd characterize the American troops is most of
them were not professional soldiers. I'd say they
were a little more difficult to lead. Even in those
days when There was much more inclination to
accept authority than there is today. There
wasn't blind acceptance of authority at all.
Of course we had some black troops and in those days
they did not have a very good reputation. It was
probably a bad mistake to have all black troops led
by white officers. when I decided to make a
transfer back to the artillery. I told you earlier
that Colonel Bilsing was a good friend of mine and
showed me possibly a little favoritism as a senior
cadet. I helped him teach agitation. So I found out
that he was division commander of, I mean division
artillery commander of a division stationed at
Fort Huachuca, Arizona. So I telephoned him and I
decided to transfer to find out if he needed any
officers in his outfit. He could definitely get a
transfer because I had such admiration for the
man. He said, well O.D. you don't want to get in this
outfit, it is a black outfit and we have trouble
with troop discipline and troop competence. What
year was this? That was 42. That was early, you see I
put in for transfer in early 42 after December the
7th. And the transfer really didn't occur until
April of 42, so I just didn't try to exercise any
preference at all on the transfer. Just let them
transfer me where they would. So I got transferred
from the post-camp and station troops of Fort Sam
Houston with the school for Bakers and Cooks as an
8th Army outfit, 8th Corps outfit, I mean out in the
3rd Army over to the division right there just
around the corner from where the headquarters
was.